---
title: "1.2.4 Gap Analysis"
date: 2026-04-21 09:43:00 +0800
categories: [Security+]
tags: [Security+]
image:
  path: /assets/images/gap.svg
  alt: Gap
---

# Introduction to Gap Analysis
It is a study of assessing of how secure you are right now and how secure you want to be in the future. You will produce a detailed report with a roadmap to close the identified gaps.

# Core Concept

| Concept       | Description                                                    |
|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Current State | What security controls, processes and people you have today    |
| Target State  | The goal you are working towards (e.g. NIST, ISO 27001)        |
| Gap           | The difference between current and target state                |
| Report        | Documents the gap and a roadmap of how to close it  |

# Procedure for Gap Analysis

## Step 1 - Choose a Baseline
A **baseline** is something for us to measure against. There are some common ones that I do see JDs include such as ISO/IEC 27000-series of standards (for EY).

## Step 2 - Evaluate People and Processes

### People Evaluation
We are evaluating people's:
- Formal experience in IT security
- Training received
- Knowledge of existing security policies and procedures

### Process Evaluation
We are evaluating systems and procceses:
- Review existing IT system against formal security policy documentation
- Identify weaknesses in current systems
- Compare weaknesses against best-practice compensating controls (how well we mitigate the weakness)


## Step 3 - Break down Broad Categories
Start with broad security domains, and then drill into individual controls.

We make use of a broad requirement and then the controls we have to satisfy that requirement.

| Broad Requirement       | Individual Controls                             |
|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Limit system access to authorised users | User Registration and Deregistration    |
|    | User access provisioning        |
|    | Management of privileged access right  |
|    | Review of user access rights |

The same thing here is done across **ALL DOMAINS, ALL DEVICES, ALL LOCATIONS**. That's actually kinda heavy workload man, how long do they even take?

> For a 50-250 employees organisation with framework ISO 27001 it is estimated to take 4-8 weeks according to snapgrc's website
{: .prompt-info}

たいへんですね！

## Step 4 - Create the Gap Analysis Report